Hey everyone, and thanks for jumping
back into the political verse.
Today, we're going to talk about market
returns under both Republican and
Democratic presidents, and we're going
to even look at it closer by looking at
who controls Congress during those
presidencies to see how the returns
differed. If you guys like the content,
make sure you subscribe to the channel,
give the video a thumbs up, and also
check out the sale on Benjamin Cowen dot
com. Link is in the description below.
Let's go ahead and jump in. So, as I
said previously, we just had our fifth
child, so pretty exciting times over
here. And I was just holding her for a
couple hours, and I thought, you know
what? Let's just launch this page.
I'm not looking to make enemies here,
right? I'm really not. What I want to
know
is what is the data say? And honestly,
I'm surprised by some of the data. So,
what if
we went in
in an unbiased way,
and objectively looked at the data, what
would it tell us about market returns
under various political party makeups?
Like whether it's presidency, or whether
it's like a Republican sweep, or a
Democratic sweep, or a Republican
president with a split Congress, or a
Republican president with a Democratic
Congress, and so on and so forth. And
so, what we want to look at
is how did the stock market return
over the last, say, 70 some odd years or
so under various political parties?
This chart here just shows the S&P 500,
and it's color-coded by
the different political parties in
power. So, dark red is a Republican
sweep,
dark blue is a Democratic sweep, and
then the various shades of red and blue
correspond to, you know, a president,
say like a different shade of blue might
be a Democratic president but
you know maybe the Republicans control
the House and or the Senate.
So it's kind of interesting. But this
chart is probably the least interesting
chart on the page and so I don't want to
spend a ton of time
talking about it. But in general you can
see that the market for the most part
just goes up into the right no matter
who's in power.
Right? No matter who's in power you can
see the market generally just trends
higher as as time goes on and especially
that's true you know since 2009 we've
had all sorts of different
you know makeups of the of the House,
Senate, and presidency and yet the
market has just gone higher
regardless. So let's look at averages.
All right?
Now this is a surprising chart to me. So
this chart here on the left is showing
you the average and median annual return
by political regime. And the reason why
I thought this might be a timely page to
have here on the platform is because we
have midterms coming up
in not so long. And I was curious
how does the market do
when those things change?
Look at this. This is really
interesting.
The average return when the Democrats
have swept the presidency, the Senate,
and the House the average return
has been 8%.
The median return
10.5%.
So pretty good, right? Pretty good.
The Republican sweep, the average return
13.3%
the median return 13.1%.
So
what's interesting is that
the Republican sweep
historically
has actually given better returns
than
the Democratic sweep.
Now, this was somewhat surprising to me.
So, I was curious
how you know, how is that possible? How
is that possible when one of the most
famously cited data points is that
10 of the last 11 recessions have
occurred under Republican presidents.
Which I I is true. So, how could it be
that a Republican sweep on average has
given better returns than Democratic
sweep? Well, it's because a lot of those
recessions
that occurred under Republican
presidencies
occurred when it wasn't a Republican
sweep.
That's the reason why.
The recessions, a lot of them actually
occur
when you have a Republican president
and a Democratic Congress or a split
Congress. So, look at this.
When you have a Republican president and
a split Congress, meaning you know, one
party controls the house and the other
party controls the Senate, the average
return is only 7 and 1/2%. The median
return is 14.7. So, that's still mostly
okay, right? Like it still seems mostly
fine a Republican president and a split
Congress.
But, where things take a downfall
is when you have a Republican president
and a full Democratic Congress.
Because when that happens, the average
return
drops to 4.9%
and the median return is 4%. That is the
lowest out of all of these,
you know, out of all the different
options. Now, the most bullish the S&P
has been
on average
is when you have a Democratic president
and a split Congress. The average return
is 17%
based on 6 years of data.
The median return is 18.3. And then when
you have a Democratic president and a
Republican Congress,
the average return is 16.2%
and the median return is 19.7, almost
20%. So, the most bullish years we have
seen over the last say seven decades
have actually occurred under Democratic
presidents
where they don't control
the They don't have a full sweep. Where
they where they have a Democrat as the
president, but they have a split
Congress or a Republican Congress.
If you're going to have a sweep,
history shows that a Republican sweep is
actually more bullish than a Democratic
sweep.
And if you're going to have a Republican
president, the worst outcome for the
markets is when you have a Democratic
Congress.
And now think about, you know, where we
are right now, right? We have the
Republican sweep.
Markets been doing fine, you know? And
later this year, we're going to have the
midterms.
And historically, when you have
midterms, the party in power tends to
lose some seats.
And so, the question is,
are we headed towards a Republican
president with a split Congress or a
Republican president with a Democratic
Congress? Because if it's a split
Congress,
that might not be as bad. If it's a
Democratic Congress, might be a little
bit worse. Now, this chart over here
shows the annual return distribution by
regime because you know, you could have
you know, this is one of those things
where there's really not a ton of data.
It's not like we're looking at at
hundreds of years of data. You know, you
say, "Well, why not?" Well, it's hard
because the political parties somewhat
change, right? Like they don't just
because they are the way they are today,
there have been some major changes in
the past. So, it's hard to just lump
everything into into one basket when the
political parties have have
fundamentally changed throughout the
throughout the centuries.
Um
So, let's look at the annual return
distribution. All right? So, when you
have a Democratic sweep
you still have some negative years,
right? Look at this. There's been plenty
of negative years under a Democratic
sweep. 1994, 1962, 1977, 1966, and 2022.
Democratic sweep market still went down.
It's just that on average the market
tends to go up.
Okay? So, Democratic sweep, still a
positive return.
What's fascinating to me is that
when you have a Democratic president and
a split Congress
over the last say seven decades, there's
not a single negative not a single
negative year
under that
makeup of the of sort of the the powers.
0.4% was the worst year and that was
2011.
2013 was almost 30%.
That's still not even the highest
returns.
We've had higher returns with a
Democratic president and a Republican
Congress where in 1995 the market went
up 34 and a half percent, a little more
than that.
And that again, that was back in 1995
under Bill Clinton. We've had some
negative years.
2000 under Bill Clinton um and then 2015
where we dropped about .7% under Obama.
What's really interesting is the best
year that we've seen was actually 1954
and
the S&P returned
45%
and this was a Republican sweep. So, if
you're curious why the average return on
the Republican sweep is so high
it's because there's this single data
point in 1954
where the market went up 45%
if you were to remove that
the average would drop a lot.
But I'm not here to cherry-pick data.
I'm here to just show you what the data
says and we decided that going back to
about 1953
made the most amount of sense in terms
of identifying you know, the political
parties and how they are today, right?
Some some consistency in in you know,
what the political parties are.
Now, what's really interesting is when
you go down over here
when you have a Republican president and
a Democratic Congress
those are some of the worst years.
under George Bush, the market dropped
over 38%
under Nixon, the market dropped 30%
under Nixon, the market dropped almost
18% 1957 14% 1969 11% 1990 7.4 1960 -3.2
right? So, there's been a lot of years
where we've had the negative returns
when we have a Republican president and
a Democratic Congress. So, when we talk
about the business cycle chart, right?
You guys remember the business cycle
chart that we've talked about a lot? If
you're not familiar with what I'm
talking about, it's here on the website.
ITC business cycle chart. I've been
curious, you know, how does it end? How
does it all How does the business cycle
finally come to an end? Because we've
been in a business cycle for a long time
now, and we still have not yet seen it
reset. And we know that it is sort of
resets in recessions. But we're not in a
recession right now.
Perhaps
that reset occurs
when you have a Republican president and
a Democratic Congress.
Which is kind of where it seems like we
may be headed. There is a chance
that
the Republicans maintain control of the
Senate.
But there's also a chance they don't.
And obviously that's changing, you know,
the odds of that are
in in fluctuating, you know, constantly
fluctuating. But I thought this was
really interesting, you know? And I know
some of you guys, you know, I'm I'm sure
that some of you watching are
Republicans, some of you are probably
Democrats, some of you are probably over
in Europe,
um and and are have political parties
that are so far different than what the
United States is in that you wonder
you're a little confused by some of the
stuff, but
this is what the data suggests, okay?
Now, if you scroll down and you look at
presidential cycle returns,
the best year on average is year three.
So, the pre-election year. The worst
year on average is the mid-term year.
But right now, the stock market's doing
pretty fine in the mid-term year.
If you were to look at at how the stock
market is doing this year, so if we look
at the 12-month candles of the stock
market,
it's currently up about 8%. It might
feel like it's up more, but the only
reason it feels like it's up more is
because there was a big drop early on in
the year.
Last year was 16%
under the Republican sweep,
and the year before that, 23, the year
before that, 24. So, we've basically
seen the market go up
over the last few years, no matter who
was in power. But,
here's a great example. In 2023, the
market went up 24%, in 2024, it went up
23%.
Then, 16, now it's currently up 8. So,
let's go back here and see what else we
can find out.
This chart shows the annual return
timeline by regime. So, it basically
just shows you, you know, each year,
1953, 1954, and then it it just breaks
it down like who's controlling what
during that time. This would be somewhat
studious to go through on a video, and
I don't have an hour right now to to go
through it. But, if you're, you know, if
you're a member of of ITCA, you can you
can certainly go through this. Now, I'm
sure some of you are like, "Well, this
is great and all, Ben, what about other
markets? You know, what This is the S&P,
what about something else?" Well, we can
look at other stuff, and that's the
great thing about it is we can come up
here to the asset selector. And by the
way, you can change this from 1953. You
can go back even further. You can go to
1933 if you want to, um to see how that
might change the data.
It doesn't change it a ton. Like, I
think the general idea stays the same.
Um the Democratic president with a split
Congress is the most bullish, the
Republican president with a Democratic
Congress is the most bearish, and on
average, a Republican sweep has returned
better returns than a a Democratic
sweep.
And if you look at the full, so you go
back even further, uh this goes back to
1928. In this case, what you'll see is
that the Democratic sweep and the
Republican sweep are more similar to
each other, right? One doesn't really
edge out the other one. In fact,
Democratic sweep on average is a little
worse than Republican sweep, but the
median return for a Democratic sweep is
better than a Republican sweep when you
go back all the way to the 1920s.
And part of the reason for not going all
the way back that far is because, you
know, you do have the Great Depression.
But again,
who am I to say that we can't include
that? I mean, there likely will be a
depression at some point in the future.
Hopefully, it's not anytime soon,
but at some point I'm I'm sure there
will be another one.
I would I would guess.
So, I think this is a really interesting
page and it just allows us to say, all
right, what can we expect based on who
controls what? And you can change the
asset selector to be something else,
right? Like if you want to go and say,
well, what about how how does the
how does the dollar do, right? Like how
does the dollar do under various, you
know, political parties? And And that's
kind of an interesting thing in and of
itself as well. What's really
interesting is going back to 1980.
The dollar tends to tends to drop the
most under Republican sweep.
Surprise, surprise, right? Not that
anyone's surprised, but under a
Republican sweep, the dollar tends to
drop the most and it tends to go up the
most when you have a Democratic
president and a Republican Congress.
I think it's fascinating to look at this
stuff. I feel like I can just look at
this stuff for for hours going through
all the different charts. And you can
see as well that on average, the dollar
tends
to do the worst going back to 1980. It
tends to do the worst in midterm years.
That's not as true That hasn't been as
true recently because we know that that
you know the dollar in midterm years at
least last couple has actually done
fine.
And you can actually go look at it. If
you just look at the the Dixie DXY
you can see in
um 2022 the dollar went up and in
2018 the dollar went up. And also I
think in 2014 it went up.
But
if you go back far enough, right? So
2010 it barely went up.
it went down.
it went down a lot.
1998 it went down a lot. So this is one
of those things where like
it's easy to have recency bias and be
like oh no the dollar always goes up in
midterm years because it has in the last
three or four. But then you go back far
enough and you're like well that's not
always true, right? Like there's times
where the dollar actually goes down in
midterm years.
And so it's actually
so what I find fascinating to me
to look at this
because
I would have assumed that the dollar
goes up in midterm years on average. But
it actually goes down if you go back far
enough and you don't just focus on the
last three or four midterm years. But if
you take in data going back say like
1980 it tells a slightly different
story. Again no surprise that it it
drops the most under a a Republican
sweep. And I'm sure a lot of you guys
are interested in like what does Bitcoin
look like? The problem is is we don't
really have as much data and as of right
now
we just have this you know I mean you
can see it has 2013.
Um
I'm not sure if we have the data going
back any further than that. It might we
might not have it. Yeah, we just have it
going back to 2013. We might change that
and have it go back to say like 2010 or
something. But if you just take it back
to 2013
you can see that the best year for
Bitcoin um
was actually 2017.
Right? So, in 2017
Bitcoin went up about 1,300%.
Now, it also went up a lot in 2013, but
unfortunately, as we have it right now,
we only have like part of 2013 data. We
don't have all of 2013's data, which is
why this page still feels somewhat
incomplete. I'd like to get a little bit
more data on there, but just as we have
it now, I thought you might want to take
a look.
The Democratic sweep has actually been
pretty bearish for for Bitcoin.
The average return under a Democratic
sweep is about -2%.
And it's because in 2021, the market
went up about 60% under Biden, but in
2022, it dropped about 64% under Biden.
So, with the Democratic sweep
Bitcoin
went down.
Um with a Republican sweep
on average, it went up 410%,
but this is where, you know, the mean
and the median start to make a little
bit more sense because while on average,
Bitcoin went up 410%, it's just being
skewed by a single data point in 2017.
Again, still a relevant data point, but
the median return under a Republican
sweep is -6%. What does that show us?
The median return under both a
Democratic president with a Democratic
Congress and a Republican president with
a Republican Congress, basically, when
you have a sweep of either political
party
it has been bearish for Bitcoin in terms
of the median return.
And the reason for that is because while
we did go up 1,300% in 2017
in 2018, the market dropped
74% and in 2025, the market dropped 6%.
Under
Republican sweeps.
See that?
So,
the market, Bitcoin, has done the worst
under Democratic sweeps and Republican
sweeps when you look at the median
return.
When you look at the average return, it
it's a lot better because of that what
happened in 2017.
So,
when you look at the highest median
return,
it actually is a Republican president
and a split Congress. Only two data only
2 years. Again, this is why I don't like
this the Bitcoin chart here yet cuz
there's not a lot of data. But, you can
see that when you have a
Democratic president and a split
Congress and a Republican president and
a split Congress, that tends to
correspond to the highest
median return.
Which is quite interesting.
Why could that be? Maybe it's just
simply because Bitcoin really doesn't
like all the uncertainty.
And
when you have a Democratic sweep or
Republican sweep, they can just push
through the stuff they want to push
through a lot easier.
But, when you have a Democratic
president
and a Republican controlled Congress or
at least partially Republican
controlled, or you have a Republican
president where where the Democrats hold
some power either in the Senate or the
House,
it leads to more
at least let me let's say this. It leads
to less uncertainty.
Because they can't just push stuff
through as easily, right? They have to
compromise. And maybe Bitcoin likes
that. Maybe Bitcoin likes that.
I also want to say one more thing.
Two more things.
Here, you can see the average returns.
You can see the midterm year on average
is -65%
on average.
What has Bitcoin done so far this year?
Well, it's down.
About 7%.
A 65% drop
from where it opened
would put it
all the way down below 40k. That'd be
quite a drop.
Right? Obviously, if that were to
happen, it would completely reset
everything. Now, I want you to imagine
if that were to happen.
Imagine if that happens, and then you
get a a split Congress or something. It
might It might actually be bullish for
Bitcoin.
That's what the data would suggest.
Course, we've never gone through a
full-blown recession
uh with Bitcoin other than the pandemic,
which was pretty short-lived, but
it'd be interesting to see how it plays
out.
Now, here it shows you just the number
of years. We have not yet seen a
Republican president and a Democratic
Congress. So, unfortunately,
we don't know what Bitcoin would do.
I know when you look at the stock
market, the stock market doesn't do that
well when you have a Republican
president and a Democratic Congress.
I don't know what Bitcoin would do.
Maybe we're going to find out later this
year, or sorry, in 2027 if if if the
Democrats take both the House and the
Senate.
If it's a split Congress,
Bitcoin tends to do better.
We'll see.
If you're a member here, you can go look
at all the different assets
um that we have
on here, and it's a lot, right? I mean,
you can look at all sorts of different
cryptocurrencies. You know, I mean, I'm
sure some of you guys are married to
some of these cryptocurrencies and are
curious how they do. Uh you can go take
a look. You can also look at individual
stocks.
You can look at commodities. How does
gold look?
Gold does
Gold does the best under Republican
sweep, which is exactly where we are
right now.
2025 being one of the best years.
So, Republican sweep
is good for gold.
Democratic sweep
not as good for gold.
So interesting, you know, because I feel
like a lot of people would assume that a
Republican sweep would be bad for gold,
um
but it's not. And and maybe you
shouldn't assume that because, you know,
if if
I don't want to get political, right?
But I mean, this is what it shows. This
is what the data shows. And and actually
the the worst returns for gold are when
you have a Democratic president and a
Republican Congress.
I'm just trying to think like long-term
here, you know, like
like I've held gold for a long time. And
it's it done really well.
And I'm still holding it, and I'm still
hoping it does well, and
on average, it still would be expected
to do well even if we get a split
Congress or a Democratic Congress, on
average.
Median return slightly different, but on
average, it should still do well.
Where it would not do well is if you
have a Democratic president and a
Republican Congress. So, I'm just
thinking ahead, you know, thinking to
like 2029,
2030, what could things look like?
Maybe even like 2031, you know, like
or sorry, um
2030.
What would this look like in in 2030
going into sort of 2031?
That Honestly, that might be the time to
sell gold.
If it if it plays out how I think it
might. So, we'll see.
Um but this is a really interesting page
and I hope you can forgive me for for
talking about politics in this way, but
hopefully you can see that I am trying
to be genuine in this case. I'm not I
don't have a narrative I'm trying to
push here, right? I really don't. I just
want to know what is the data say? And
the data says that Republican sweeps
historically have been better than
Democratic sweeps for the markets,
especially if you include, you know,
back to 1954. But it also shows that
Republican sweeps with the Democratic
Congress is quite bearish. And that the
market is in the best when you have a
Democratic sweep in like a split
Congress or a Republican Congress. So,
that's what the data suggests. We'll see
what happens later this year. If you
guys like the content, make sure you
subscribe to the channel, give the video
a thumbs up. And again, check out the
sale on benjamincowan.com. You can find
the link to that in the description
below. I'll see you guys next time. Bye.